What is climate change? A really simple guid
https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-24021772
Human activities are causing world temperatures to rise, with more intense heatwaves and rising sea-levels among the consequences. Things are likely to worsen in the coming decades, but scientists argue urgent action can limit the worst effects of climate change.

What is climate change?
Climate change is the long-term shift in the Earth's average temperatures and weather conditions.

Over the last decade, the world was on average around 1.2C warmer than during the late 19th Century.

It has now been confirmed that global warming exceeded 1.5C across the 12 month period between February 2023 and January 2024. That followed 2023 being declared the warmest year on record.

The temperature increase was driven by human-caused climate change and boosted by the natural El Niño weather phenomenon.


How are humans causing climate change?
The climate has changed throughout the Earth's history and natural factors, such as El Niño, can affect the weather for shorter periods of time, as happened in 2023.

But natural causes cannot explain the particularly rapid warming seen in the last century, according to the UN's climate body, the IPCC.

This long-term climate change has been caused by human activity, the IPCC says, mainly from the widespread use of fossil fuels - coal, oil and gas - in homes, factories and transport.

When fossil fuels burn, they release greenhouse gases - mostly carbon dioxide (CO2). This traps extra energy in the atmosphere near the Earth's surface, causing the planet to heat up.

Since the start of the Industrial Revolution - when humans started burning large amounts of fossil fuels - the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere has risen by about 50%, external.

The CO2 released from burning fossil fuels, external has a distinctive chemical fingerprint which matches the type increasingly found in the atmosphere.


Why does 1.5C matter and how will future climate change affect the world?
The more average temperatures increase, the worse the impacts of climate change become.

Limiting long-term average temperature rises to 1.5Cis crucial, according to the IPCC.

The science is not completely certain, but the consequences of 2C global warming versus 1.5C, external could include:

Extreme hot days would be on average 4C warmer at mid-latitudes (regions outside the poles and tropics), versus 3C at 1.5C

Sea-level rise would be 0.1m higher than at 1.5C, exposing up to 10 million more people to events including more frequent flooding

More than 99% of coral reefs would be lost, compared with 70-90% at 1.5C

Twice the number of plants and vertebrates (animals with a backbone) would be exposed to unsuitable climate conditions across more than half the geographical area where they are found

Several hundred million more people may be exposed to climate-related risks and susceptible to poverty by 2050 than at 1.5C.

The call to limit temperature rise to 1.5C was partly designed to avoid crossing so-called "tipping points".

After these thresholds are passed, changes could accelerate and become irreversible, such as the collapse of the Greenland Ice Sheet. However, it's not clear precisely where these thresholds sit.